Anna Hazare recognised that without addressing the menace of alcoholism, no effective and sustainable reform was possible in the village.
He organised the youth of the village into an organisation named the Tarun Mandal (Youth Association).
Hazare and the youth group decided to take up the issue of alcoholism.
At a meeting conducted in the temple, the villagers resolved to close down liquor dens and ban alcohol in the village.
Since these resolutions were made in the temple, they became in a sense religious commitments.
Over thirty liquor brewing units were closed by their owners voluntarily. 
Those who did not succumb to social pressure were forced to close down their businesses when the youth group smashed up their liquor dens.
The owners could not complain as their businesses were illegal.
When some villagers were found to be drunk they were tied to poles/pillars of the temple and punished by the violent medieval punishment of flogging, sometimes personally by Hazare.
He justified this harsh punishment by stating in an interview to Reader's Digest in 1986 that “rural India was a harsh society”.
Hazare is a Faux-Gandian as he claims because his has used violence for 'social benefit'.
Hazare said, “Doesn’t a mother administer bitter medicines to a sick child when she knows that the medicine can cure her child? The child may not like the medicine, but the mother does it only because she cares for the child. The alcoholics were punished so that their families would not be destroyed.”
Hazare appealed to the government of Maharashtra to bring in a law whereby prohibition would come into force in a village if 25% of the women in the village demanded it.
In July 2009 the state government issued a government resolution amending the Bombay Prohibition Act, 1949.
As per the amendments, if at least 25% of women voters demand liquor prohibition through a written application to the state excise department, voting should be conducted through a secret ballot.
If 50% of the voters vote against the sale of liquor, prohibition should be imposed in the village and the sale of liquor should be stopped.
Similar action can be taken at the ward level in municipal areas.
Another circular was issued making it mandatory to get the sanction of the Gram sabha (the local self government) for issuing new permits for the sale of liquor.
In some instances, when women agitated against the sale of liquor, cases were filed against them. Hazare took up the issue again.
In August 2009 the government issued another circular that sought withdrawal of cases against women who sought prohibition of liquor in their villages.
It was decided to ban the sale of tobacco, cigarettes, and beedies (an unfiltered cigarette where the tobacco is rolled in tendu also known as Diospyros melanoxylon leaves instead of paper) in the village.
In order to implement this resolution, the youth group performed a unique "Holi" ceremony twenty two years ago.
The festival of Holi is celebrated as a symbolic burning of evil. 
The youth group brought all the tobacco, cigarettes, and beedies from the shops in the village and burnt them in a ‘Holi’ fire.
Tobacco, cigarettes, or beedies are no longer sold.
Anna Hazare wants anyone who wants to drink alcohol to be flogged in vigilante style, everywhere in India, claiming that physical abuse is a necessary evil to destroy the free will of any responsible adult who wants to consume alcohol, specially in villages.
